#summary A roadmap for the process of creating your own hub
#labels Featured
=How To Create a Hub=

  # Review the [https://docs.google.com/Doc?docid=0Af-22shvZFIQZGQ5eDk3d2tfMmRyaGhqNmZw&hl=en INCF Atlas Hub Specification and INCF Atlasing Infrastructure Overview] which describes INCF Atlas rpoject.
  # Have some data to offer. Remember that an INCF Atlas Hub is a _front end_ to your data that provides a common interface to your data.
  # Have the desire to follow INCF [http://code.google.com/p/incf-dai/wiki/AtlasRequestInterfaceSpec Atlas Interface Specification] which is based on the [http://www.opengeospatial.org/standards/wps OGC WPS standard]. This describes the client-server _contract_ in terms of requests from a client to the hub and responses from the hub to a client. Remember a hub offers web services. It is not a web application. Hubs use standard HTTP GET requests and responds with XML documents. There is no GUI and no HTML.
  # Determine what coordinate system you would like to use.
  # Learn and use the [WaxML WaxML schema], or SRS (spacial reference system), for XML responses to a client.
  # Choose a name the hub. Existing hub names are 
    * ABA (Allen Brain Atlas)
    * EMAP (Edinburgh Mouse Atlas Project)
    * UCSD (University of California, San Diego, CCDB (Cell-Centered Database)
    * WHS (Waxholm)
    * Central (Central is not a hub but rather a compiler that unions data across the hubs)
  # Consider using a framework library such as [http://www.deegree.org/ Deegree] which facilitates software development. The hubs listed above use Deegree.
  # Implement the requests !GetCapabilities and !DescribeProcess. These standard WPS request describes the Execute requests methods offered by the hub and allow a hub to be cataloged.
  # Examine the [http://code.google.com/p/incf-dai/wiki/AtlasFunctionHubApplicabilityTable  Atlas Function-Hub Applicability Table].
  # Select the functions you wish to offer at your hub. Beyond the standard !GetCapabilities and !DescribeProcee requests, it is expected this minimal set of functions would be offered by a hub: DescibeSRS, !DescribeTransformations, GetStructureNamesByPOI, ListSRSs, !ListTransformations, and TransformPOI.
  # Review section 6 of the [https://docs.google.com/Doc?docid=0Af-22shvZFIQZGQ5eDk3d2tfMmRyaGhqNmZw&hl=en INCF Atlas Hub Specification and INCF Atlasing Infrastructure Overview].
  # Use the atlas-common code. This is optional, but this library, or hub building toolkit, is used by the INCF Atlas development team at UCSD. It includes code that is common across multiple hubs such as standard SRS transformations and exception reporting.
  # Use the standard [http://schemas.opengis.net/ows/0.3.0/owsExceptionReport.xsd OWS/WPS Exception Report] for reporting exceptions or conditions that prevent the hub from returning a normal response.
  # Consider using the WPS exception report to report INCF Atlas-defined functions not supported at your hub or not yet implemented.
  # Publish, test, and register your hub with INCF Atlas Central.

=INCF Common API=

  # Review the [http://132.239.131.188/incf-common/doc INCF Common API].