#summary Project notes for integrating Slice and INCF Atlas Hubs.
<wiki:toc max_depth="5"/>
=Introduction=
Project notes for integrating Slice and INCF Atlas Hubs.

=Purpose=
To integrate Slicer with INCF Atlas Hubs.

=INCF Altas Hubs as Seen from Slicer=
 * Atlas hubs are "fronts" for accessing data from a variety of atlas data sources
 * Atlas data sources currently include 
   * ABA (Allen Brain Atlas from the Allen Brain Institute)
   * EMAP (Edinburgh Mouse Atlas Project)
   * WHS ()
   * UCSD (Cell-Centered Database (CCDB) at the University of California, San Diego)
 * INCF Atlas Hubs provide a uniform interface for requesting atlas data from the corresponding atlas data source
 * The Hubs do not return actual atlas data directly
 * A client application, such as Slicer, can use the common INCF Atlas Hub interface to get references (links and metadata) to actual atlas source data

=Questions Regarding the Scope of Integration=
 # Are we adding a capability to Slicer to import data via INCF Atlas Hubs? E.g. accessing these INCF processes:
   * DescribeSRS
   * !DescribeTransformation
   * Get2DImagesByPOI
   * GetAnnotationsByPOI
   * GetCorrelationsByPOI
   * GetGenesByPOI
   * !GetGenesByGeneId
   * GetObjectsByPOI
   * GetStructureNamesByPOI
   * !GetTransformationChain
   * ListSRSs 
   * !ListTransformations 
   * Retrieve2DImages, 
 # Are we adding a capability to Slicer to export data to INCF Atlas? This would be the like
   * !SetAnnotations
 # Are we adding a capability to Slicer to use an INCF Atlas tool? This would be like
   * TransformPOI
 # Are we expecting to add anything to INCF Atlas processes that would interact with Slicer (from the INCF Atlas end)? (I'm assuming NO.)

=Scheme for Slicer as an INCF Atlas Client=
Note: For the time being, I'm ignoring the INCF Atlas Central Hub and the WPS !GetCapabilities and !DescribePorcesses functions.
 * A Slicer user in a Slicer session may submit an HTTP GET request to an INCF Atlas Hub
 * The hub will return an XML document (typically containing a link or a list of links and some metadata relating to the links)
 * Slicer will parse the returned data and display the returned information
 * The Slicer user may select a link to pursue and Slicer will submit a corresponding HTTP GET request
 * Slicer will receive the requested data
 * ...

=Links=

==Slicer==
 * [http://www.slicer.org Primary site] (www.slicer.org)
 * [http://www.slicer.org/pages/DeveloperOrientation Developer's page]
 * [http://www.slicer.org/slicerWiki/index.php/Documentation/4.1/Developers/Modules#Command_Line_Interface_.28CLI.29 Command Line Interface (CLI)]
 * [http://viewvc.slicer.org/viewvc.cgi/Slicer4/trunk/Modules/CLI/ CLI modules code]

==Slicer-XNAT==
 * [http://www.slicer.org/slicerWiki/index.php/Slicer3:XNAT Slicer3-XNAT Integration]
 * [http://www.na-mic.org/Wiki/index.php/2012_Summer_Project_Week:XNATSlicerIntegration Summer 2012 project]

==XNAT==
 * [http://xnat.org/ Primary site] User search box (upper right) "slicer"
 * [http://xnat.org/about/xnat-tools.html XNAT tools] Mention of Slicer
 * [https://wiki.xnat.org/display/XNAT14/XNAT+Tools XNAT tools 1.4] Mention of Slicer
 * [https://wiki.xnat.org/display/XNAT/XNAT+Client+Tools XNAT tools 1.5] Mention of Slicer

=Background=

==Jeff Grethe email of 9/5/12==

 * Primary Slicer site (http://www.slicer.org). This has all the background information on Slicer. 
 * There is a specific developer's page (http://www.slicer.org/pages/DeveloperOrientation) that also has information on how to build slider (http://www.slicer.org/slicerWiki/index.php/Documentation/4.1/Developers/Build_Instructions) including information on how to access the code base via GIT or SVN.
 * One other application that has been integrated with Slicer that deals with retrieving data is XNAT (http://www.na-mic.org/Wiki/index.php/2012_Summer_Project_Week:XNATSlicerIntegration)
 * For the INCF atlasing services there is a page (http://atlasing.incf.org/wiki/Developers) for developers that links to other resources including an overview document (https://docs.google.com/View?id=dd9x97wk_2drhhj6fp)